Reading another "tool" in Roy Peter Clark's "Writing Tools" last night and it confirmed something I think I've learned in the last six months and four fiction writing classes and four short stories.  Full outlines may not be useful and the difficulty of them might be founded.  I know early on I as convinced, as many, that I was going to start a novel.  Which is quite foolish for novice writers in my opinion yet many that I've encountered are doing that exact thing.  In any event, I read many books trying to find some formula or way of laying out things so I could write a novel.  Then once I was convinced I knew enough, starting outlining, snowflaking or doing whatever the current book said I should do to lay out my novel.

Each instance mostly failed as I could never come up wth "enough" scenes for a novel of proper size.  In a shortened course I took over the Summer that was only four weeks as opposed to more standard six weeks at Redbud, I honestly learned very little but the instructor did talk briefly on some story forms.  The triangle and perhaps something else but for our horror short stories or chapters he suggested a simple "beatsheet".  We were to write one out the first week and we would review the next.

Two simple concepts occurred to me as I got into my car to head home.  I should focus on writing "stories" and not so much a novel.  At some point, I might write a story that approached the size of a novella or even novel but that shouldn't be my focus as a writing noob.  So I turned on my car and as it sometimes does, with a mind of its own, started playing some random song from my iPhone.  It was quite odd as I typically listen to songs via Pandora (no, not that more popular one cause of bad actors doing podcasts I cannot abide) but in this case it started playing a song via Apple Music which I can't remember the last time I did that.

Even more odd was the song it chose, "The Lady in Red".  I don't remember ever listening to that song on Apple Music or any music service to be honest.  I like the song and I might have chosen it at some point but if I did it was quite some time ago.  But I decided my car was telling me what my horror short story was about, so during the hour long drive home I considered it then wrote out a beatsheet when I arrived at home.

Here it is:

The Lady in Red
    ◆    Dude enters a bar
    ◆    Looks around, and it is a typical scene
    ◆    Sees lady in red dress on the dance floor dancing awkwardly
    ◆    She beckons him
    ◆    He approaches and dances with her
    ◆    Notices she looks anorexic, sickly, or perhaps strung out
    ◆    As they dance, his hormones override his concerns
    ◆    “Take me home”
    ◆    At the house, she sits him down and kisses him, then paralyzes him
    ◆    He must watch her gyrate and die before him
    ◆    Something organic and alive crawls out of her over onto him
    ◆    Slowly opens his chest and crawls inside
    ◆    He gets up and goes back to the bar

I was so excited to get an idea and lay it out so quickly that that weekend I simply sat down and banged out my "Shitty First Draft" in a couple hours.  It was around 3k words which seems to be a sweet spot for me right now since 3 out of my first 4 short stories are roughly that size.

So...writing by the "seat of my pants" hadn't really worked although it was fun for a bit and laying everything out in detail hadn't either but a simple, one level list of "beats" seemed to work well.  At least for a shorter story.  I'm working on a longer one based on an initial beatsheet and seems to be coming along as well.